# Outa Time
I wanted to do a postmortum write up before I had forgotten too much. This is mostly for me, but also for any of you who are interested. Thanks for being here. 
This was: the first game jam I've ever participated in, the first game I've "published" in many many years, my first Itch game, the first web game I've ever made in Godot (it shows, the performance is way better in the native builds lol), it was a lot of firsts. 
I expected the game jam rules and deadline to change the way I make games. I'm a meanderer most of the time, playing with ideas, putting them down and then coming back to them much later, falling down all the "how do I actually build that?" rabbit holes that come from whatever idea I have for a game at the time. I was originally going to use Pico8 for the jam, because it has built in tools for sprite editing and music creation that I am sorta familar with. I didn't have a full production pipeline for Godot that was quick set up, and I thought jumping engines would fix that and be ok. In late December I tried to make some stuff in Pico8 just so I could get used to it. It was slow going. Like, very slow. Turns out learning a new engine is a bigger task than building out a leaner pipeline for art and music. That was the first of many diversions that I normally would have taken that I just had to say "no" and keep moving. It was a totally different experience for my "art" to have these kinds of contraints put on it, and I'm kinda a fan. Maybe not the last minute "can I finish the one more level?!?" as I watch the timer tick down on the game jam page part though.

## The Idea
When I read the Public Domain Day blog post on 1 January, it was pretty clear to me right away that I wanted to do something with the music that was entering the public domain this year. In part because I'm a musician and I love music. Also I figured hardly anyone else would do it when there was a much longer list of books and films and visual artwork to choose from. 
My first ideas where the most obvious, as first ideas usually are. I came up with a bunch of cool rhythem game ideas, puzzles and races and Crypt of the Necrodancer-style RPGs. Things that would require me to find recordings or record my own music to suppor the game play. 
The problem was that I haven't ever built a rhythem game, and the most important part of a good rhythem game is that the music is in perfect sync with what is happening on the screen. Great entries in the genre have whole calibration systems built into them to make sure what you see and what you hear are matching no matter what you're playing it on. This game had to be playable in the web browser and playing sound in perfect sync with what is one screen has certainly come a long way since my first Flash games, it's not great. Especially since Godot has to run in single-threaded mode in the browser to be the most stable and compatible. This combo of not having any clue how to build it and the flakeyness of the target platform at this particular thing ended the rhythem game path pretty quickly. 

### What if the music was the level?
I had to figure out how to do a "music game" without the music playback being pivotal to the game play. This was also about the time I started running into the hassle of finding recordings that were released in 1930 of music that was also released in 1930. As a shortcut around both problems I came to the conclusion the sheet music itself should be the focus. This idea was based on remembering when I was a kid in band class, while we were sight reading things I often felt flustered and panicked and I remember imagining navigating the music, at tempo, like it was a hallway I had to get to the end of. This seems very game like, so I rolled with it. (I'm a much calmer sight reader today, in case you were wondering.)
This was just in time for the next issue to arrive: it's incredibly difficult to find public domain sheet music. The Library of Congress apparently has a huge collection of it, but most of it is not online. In fact most of the online public domain sheet music libraries I found where dedicated to classical music, mostly from the 18th and 19th centuries. "Sunny Side of the Street" was not my first choice of song to use, it was just one of a very few that I could actually find the sheet music for the original 1930 arrangement. 

## Oh yeah, you're one dude who works a full-time job
I don't know if other solo devs have this problem, but I play a lot of really awesome indie games and am inspired by them. They are inevitably developed by a team of people who's day job is making video games and it takes them years to make their games (Stardew Valley being the exception, ConcernedApe is a beast), and most of my ideas are on the same scale with what they're releasing. This is to say, I regularly have problems with scale and scope. 
My original idea for "Savin' the Sunny Side" (well before it had that name) was a precision platformer where you jumped, and grappling hooked, and wall slid your way through each line of music, repelling invading baddies with your arsenel of jazz based tools. It was Celeste meets Deadcells with Tex Avery style animated characters all inside public domain jazz music of 1930. It was a masterpiece of a game, worthy of awards and publishing deals and... a bit out of reach for somethig I had 30 days to do in my spare time.
Luckily for me, I am aware of this problem, so after I let myself imagine this amazing game for 45 minutes or so, I immediately started trying to figure out what parts of it I could actually build and have playable in a form that made sense and worked in the browser in the time I had. 
I've been making things in Godot for a few years now, I'm pretty okay at GDScript, and I've built out some templates for the basic stuff I always need to do for every game. I knew (because like a nerd I went and read a bunch of blog posts about how could you possibly build a game in the timelimit of a weekend long game jam as prep for this month long one) that having these boilerplate pieces of game was going to be key to actually being able to have something to play that wasn't just a slice of a level. The start screen (minus the image and title text), the settings, and the scene loader as a template that I cobbled together after building all of those things for different tutorials, and I use it as the basis for every game I start. It pulls in the excellent PhantomCamera plugin that I would pull my hair out if I had to live without it. It also includes the super customizable platformer player controller I built after building many many player controllers in the first year of learning Godot and having the way every player character I built handled. All of those pieces are a huge amount of work to build from scratch, and ultimately having them is why I stuck with Godot for the jam. 
Having all these things ready to go meant "platformer" was the default starting position. What I hadn't built, or ever thought about before, was the rope-swinging grappling hook feature. "It's probably not that hard" I said, famous-last-words-ingly. It's true the having the player throw a thing in a specific direct and figuring out if it "hit" a solid surface was easy. Having the player then swing through the air as if there was gravity and air resistance and all the force was pulling on the rope was not anywhere near as easy an addition to "I build jumping with 10 different customization parameters including air resistance and down gravity and coyote time" as I had initially thought. After watching a couple of videos of the most basic version of this and reading a couple of blog posts that seemed like the author had just watched the same videos I did, I was pretty sure this was a boondoggle. I didn't want to spend 25 days to have a really slick swinging mechanic with basically no game attached to it. "Grappling Hook" is now on the list of things to figure out how to do for after the jam.
With the swinging mechanic off the table, the prototype level with just running and jumping was, well it was pretty boring. I had originally though the game would be a race, and the tempo of the music would control the difficulty. Without having to swing and time your grapples, it was a pretty boring course of jump mostly easy jumps (except for measures with a whole note or like two half notes that were impossibly jumps) and annoying wall jumping to get over the note stems.Not wanting to make a not-fun racing game or mine the music theory classes I took 25ish years ago for appropriate things to add to the level that wouldn't change what the music actually said to be obsticals, I decided the platformer idea was a dead-end. Week one was over. 

### What if it isn't a platformer, Mario?
I'm not totally sure when I decided to switch to 3rd person perspective and zoom way in. I do know that I spent about 2 hours drawing the first line of the score over and over again on my iPad trying to come up with new, non-platformer ideas. My best guess is that at some point I pinch-zoomed + rotated and that stood out as an interesting idea. 
The race was out, if the side-scrolling version of the race was boring, the 3d person version was like a perscription strength sleep aid. But the idea of using your jazz tools to defend the music seemed interesting, and the more I zoomed in, the larger the space I had to work with and it made the notes feel kinda alien. I didn't have a 3rd person controller, but it was as simple as removing all the jump stuff from my platformer controller and "save as"-ing.
What were you defending the notes against? Why would they need to be defended? What if they weren't there yet, they hadn't been written. What if you needed to make sure they would be? These last couple of years have been tough to be creative in due to * gestures wildly everywhere. * That was also happening in 1930 as the world was falling apart via the Great Depression the leadup to World War 2. This felt like a theme I could explore that was relatable.

### The story takes shape 
This is where the story for the game started: You were some sort of muse or fairy or godling and your job was to make sure the crushing gloom and despair of the world didn't flatten the artists. This is why you're doing whatever it is you had to do. The threat you have to defend against is everything, its coming at you from all sides and it never stops. At one point I had the idea that the gloom would creep in more slowly and spawn little droney baddies, but I scrapped that because of time (didn't want to have to deal with navigation maps) and it would have required more tools that I didn't have time to design and build. So I sped up the gloom (the real world news helped inspire this change)so it felt opressive and like you had to run around constantly to even see it all and understand what to deal with. I made the character turn speed super slow so it was more floaty, it really added to the sense of chaos to not have a super tight control over where you were in the constantly shrinking space. 
I didn't expect to have a crazy detailed story for this little game, but I am happliy surprised how this one developed. I usually try to do story first and then come up with game mechanics that fit, this was the exact opposite of my normal process, because of the time constraints. I need to apparently try to build story in this direction more. 

## Games are like 10 art projects in one
By the end of week two I had a prototype of the level that I was happy with, it was like 90% of what level 1 ended up being, as far as the game code and elements. And if you could make a super cool video game by only writing code, we would be in a world that was even more flooded with video games that we already are. I needed art for everything, and since this was a game about music I needed actual music to play. 

### Oh yeah, you gotta see the stuff to play the game, huh?
When I started prototyping stuff, I just grabbed a free sprite sheet from the awesome (Kenney)[https://www.kenney.nl] the the intention of replacing all of them with my own art, which I left until the last possibly second and that was a mistake. I didn't have time to replace all of it. The player character is still a space guy from the Kenney pack because I never came up with a character design I liked. A lot of the level artwork I just did with solid color tiles and I used the TileLayer's grid to make pixel art. All the notes work this way, as well as the rests (except for the start rest) and the flat sign that is on a few notes. I did this because I didn't have a fast artwork pipeline set up when I started this. I have Affinity Designer -> Spine pipeline for drawing and animating that I have used with some success for other projects, but it's the exact opposite of fast. I love the characters in Cult of the Lamb and when I learned that's the tool they used to animate them I set out to learn it. It's awesome. Just not for this. I didn't have 2 weeks to illustrate and animate a character. 
It is going to sound crazy, but I bought AESprite last week specifically to solve this problem. I'm not a big pixel art guy, but I needed something I could use to get things done quickly and AESprite was easy to learn. The little bomb (which is too little tbh) animated sprite that made it into the game was the "Can I make something that looks good in 10 mins or less" test I did in AESprite. I'm sad I didn't leave enough time to use it more, but I'm certainly going to be using it for thigns in the future. Maybe I'm a pixel art guy now?

### Queue the orchestra
Originally I had planned to use something like Garage Band to get real instrument sounds. My main computer is a Linux machine. I have a 4 year old M2 Mac Mini sitting on my desk and I use it mostly for doing Mac builds and making art (I love you linux, but there aren't any serious art tools that work for me available on linux. Maybe someday.) Switching back and forth is a huge pain for multiple reasons. It was slowing me down. On top of that, the sound files with the real instruments were freakin' huge even as MP3s. Having to load and play multiple sound files mostly in sync in the browser was already giving me anxiety, having those files be multiple MB each didn't help. So I started looking for alternatives. 
I thought about how simple the sequencer in Pico8 is and how much that appealed to me before the jam started. So I went looking for one. I spent a Saturday afternoon playing with a bunch of them. I landed on BoscaCeoil Blue because it had a big library of MIDI instruments and it felt like playing an SNES game to make the music. It worked great. I love it. I wanted to just sit and nerd out with it. I spent way too much time playing with different instruments and layering them together to make the noise the bomb makes when you drop it and it ticks down and explodes. Sadly I didn't have time to do any more SFX, but I could have hapily spent a week or more making them. 
The workflow I ended up with was finishing layout out a level in Godot, then making the music for that 4-bar phrase. I exported to WAV and then converted to MP3 using Audacity because I was targeting the web platform (otherwise I would have just used the WAV files as is.)
The one major issue I ran into was on the last day, the first time I exported the game as a web page and tried it out. The music wasn't playing. I had to rearchitect my whole music system to fix it, using a dedicated AudioStreamPlayer for each MP3 so the export would include the sound file. Originally each level had a single music player and I loaded the sound files from the disk when the level loaded. This didn't work on the web. I'm sure there is a more elegant solution than what I landed on but I didn't have time to find it. 

## Wrap it up already
This was quite a bit longer than I expected. I'm sad I didn't get all the levels finished, and I had to skip out on some planned SFX and artwork, but overall I'm super stoked that the game I had planned (eventually) exists. I decided to join the game jam because 30 days seemed like a reasonable amount of time (I think I spent between 40-50 hours total over that 30 days) for me to get something out. I wanted to put some constraints on myself to see if I could get a game out successfully. And it (mostly) was enough time. And I did get a game out. Yay! 